- Marcus Tullius Cicero
A room without books is like a body without a soul.
If you have a garden and a library, you have everything you need.
Six mistakes mankind keeps making century after century:
To be ignorant of what occurred before you were born is to remain always a child. For what is the worth of human life, unless it is woven into the life of our ancestors by the records of history?
In times of war, the law falls silent.
Read at every wait; read at all hours; read within leisure; read in times of labor; read as one goes in; read as one goest out. The task of the educated mind is simply put: read to lead.
If we are not ashamed to think it, we should not be ashamed to say it.
Gratitude is not only the greatest of virtues, but the parent of all others.
Friendship improves happiness, and abates misery, by doubling our joys, and dividing our grief
For there is but one essential justice which cements society, and one law which establishes this justice. This law is right reason, which is the true rule of all commandments and prohibitions. Whoever neglects this law, whether written or unwritten, is necessarily unjust and wicked.
Not to know what has been transacted in former times is to be always a child. If no use is made of the labours of past ages, the world must remain always in the infancy of knowledge.
The authority of those who teach is often an obstacle to those who want to learn.
While there's life, there's hope.
For books are more than books, they are the life, the very heart and core of ages past, the reason why men worked and died, the essence and quintessence of their lives.
The life given us, by nature is short; but the memory of a well-spent life is eternal.
The life of the dead is set in the memory of the living.
Politicians are not born; they are excreted.
The face is a picture of the mind with the eyes as its interpreter.
To study philosophy is nothing but to prepare one's self to die.
The shifts of fortune test the reliability of friends.
The life of the dead is placed on the memories of the living. The love you gave in life keeps people alive beyond their time. Anyone who was given love will always live on in another's heart.
I criticize by creation, not by finding fault.
It is not by muscle, speed, or physical dexterity that great things are achieved, but by reflection, force of character, and judgment.
What is morally wrong can never be advantageous, even when it enables you to make some gain that you believe to be to your advantage. The mere act of believing that some wrongful course of action constitutes an advantage is pernicious.
We must not say every mistake is a foolish one.
Life is nothing without friendship.
It is foolish to tear one's hair in grief, as though sorrow would be made less by baldness.
It is a great thing to know your vices.
I am not ashamed to confess I am ignorant of what I do not know.
A happy life consists in tranquility of mind.
Your enemies can kill you, but only your friends can hurt you.
When you wish to instruct, be brief; that men's [children's] minds take in quickly what you say, learn its lesson, and retain it faithfully. Every word that is unnecessary only pours over the side of a brimming mind.
The enemy is within the gates; it is with our own luxury, our own folly, our own criminality that we have to contend.
Our span of life is brief, but is long enough for us to live well and honestly.
Law applied to its extreme is the greatest injustice
Any man can make mistakes, but only an idiot persists in his error
Freedom is participation in power.
The function of wisdom is to discriminate between good and evil.
Knowledge which is divorced from justice may be called cunning rather than wisdom.
The man who backbites an absent friend, nay, who does not stand up for him when another blames him, the man who angles for bursts of laughter and for the repute of a wit, who can invent what he never saw, who cannot keep a secret -- that man is black at heart: mark and avoid him.
Where is there dignity unless there is honesty?
Nemo enim est tam senex qui se annum non putet posse vivere.
Though silence is not necessarily an admission, it is not a denial, either.
Never injure a friend, even in jest.
It is the peculiar quality of a fool to perceive the faults of others and to forget his own.
Nemo est qui tibi sapientius suadere possit te ipso: numquam labere, si te audies.
To be content with what we possess is the greatest and most secure of riches.
God's law is 'right reason.' When perfectly understood it is called 'wisdom.' When applied by government in regulating human relations it is called 'justice.
a friend is a second self
Ability without honor is useless.
Time obliterates the fictions of opinion and confirms the decisions of nature.
What one has, one ought to use; and whatever he does, he should do with all his might.
What an ugly beast is the ape, and how like us.
A mind without instruction can no more bear fruit than can a field, however fertile, without cultivation.
We are bound by the law, so that we may be free.
Diseases of the soul are more dangerous and more numerous than those of the body.
Freedom is a possession of inestimable value.
We must not only obtain Wisdom: we must enjoy her.
“Few are those who wish to be endowed with virtue rather than to seem so.”
It is our own evil thoughts which madden us.”
Hours and days and months and years go by; the past returns no more, and what is to be we cannot know; but whatever the time gives us in which we live, we should therefore be content.”
Nothing stands out so conspicuously, or remains so firmly fixed in the memory, as something which you have blundered.”
Sed nescio quo modo nihil tam absurde dici potest quod non dicatur ab aliquo philosphorum. (There is nothing so absurd but some philosopher has said it.)”
Men decide far more problems by hate, love, lust, rage, sorrow, joy, hope, fear, illusion or some other inward emotion, than by reality, authority, any legal standard, judicial precedent, or statute.”
Dogs wait for us faithfully.”
Cultivation of the mind is as necessary as food to the body”
Nature herself has imprinted on the minds of all the idea of God”
To teach is a necessity, to please is a sweetness, to persuade is a victory.”
As for myself, I can only exhort you to look on Friendship as the most valuable of all human possessions, no other being equally suited to the moral nature of man, or so applicable to every state and circumstance, whether of prosperity or adversity, in which he can possibly be placed. But at the same time I lay it down as a fundamental axiom that "true Friendship can only subsist between those who are animated by the strictest principles of honour and virtue." When I say this, I would not be thought to adopt the sentiments of those speculative moralists who pretend that no man can justly be deemed virtuous who is not arrived at that state of absolute perfection which constitutes, according to their ideas, the character of genuine wisdom. This opinion may appear true, perhaps, in theory, but is altogether inapplicable to any useful purpose of society, as it supposes a degree of virtue to which no mortal was ever capable of rising.”
Natural ability without education has more often raised a man to glory and virtue than education without natural ability.”
The closer the collapse of the Empire, the crazier its laws are.”
I prefer the most unfair peace to the most righteous war.”
Trust no one unless you have eaten much salt with him.”
Endless money forms the sinews of war.”
The best Armour of Old Age is a well spent life preceding it; a Life employed in the Pursuit of useful Knowledge, in honourable Actions and the Practice of Virtue; in which he who labours to improve himself from his Youth, will in Age reap the happiest Fruits of them; not only because these never leave a Man, not even in the extremest Old Age; but because a Conscience bearing Witness that our Life was well-spent, together with the Remembrance of past good Actions, yields an unspeakable Comfort to the Soul”
He only employs his passion who can make no use of his reason.”
Kindness is stronger than fear.”
To be rather than to seem.”
True law is right reason in agreement with nature; it is of universal application, unchanging and everlasting; it summons to duty by its commands, and averts from wrongdoing by its prohibitions.”
They who say that we should love our fellow-citizens but not foreigners, destroy the universal brotherhood of mankind, with which benevolence and justice would perish forever”
To make a mistake is only human; to persist in a mistake is idiotic.”
History is the witness that testifies to the passing of time; it illumines reality, vitalizes memory, provides guidance in daily life and brings us tidings of antiquities. ”
Let us assume that entertainment is the sole end of reading; even so I think you would hold that no mental employment is so broadening to the sympathies or so enlightening to the understanding. Other pursuits belong not to all times, all ages, all conditions; but this gives stimulus to our youth and diversion to our old age; this adds a charm to success, and offers a haven of consolation to failure. Through the night-watches, on all our journeyings, and in our hours of ease, it is our unfailing companion.”
Memory is the treasury and guardian of all things.”
Omnia mea mecum porto.”
A man of faith is also full of courage”
I have always been of the opinion that unpopularity earned by doing what is right is not unpopularity at all, but glory.”
In a republic this rule ought to be observed: that the majority should not have the predominant power.”
“The welfare of the people is the highest law”
In this statement, my Scipio, I build on your own admirable definition, that there can be no community, properly so called, unless it be regulated by a combination of rights. And by this definition it appears that a multitude of men may be just as tyrannical as a single despot and indeed this is the most odious of all tyrannies, since no monster can be more barbarous than the mob, which assumes the name and mask of the people.”
A mental stain can neither be blotted out by the passage of time nor washed away by any waters.”
Everyone has the obligation to ponder well his own specific traits of character. He must also regulate them adequately and not wonder whether someone else's traits might suit him better. The more definitely his own a man's character is, the better it fits him.”
The mind becomes accustomed to things by the habitual sight of them, and neither wonders nor inquires about the reasons for things it sees all the time.”
Here is a man whose life and actions the world has already condemned - yet whose enormous fortune...has already brought him acquittal!”
Books: our unfailing companions”
If you have no confidence in self, you are twice defeated in the race of life. With confidence, you have won even before you have started.”
There is, I assure you, a medical art for the soul. It is philosophy, whose aid need not be sought, as in bodily diseases, from outside ourselves. We must endeavor with all our resources and all our strength to become capable of doctoring ourselves.”
Silence is one of the great arts of conversation.”
If you would abolish covetousness, you must abolish its mother, profusion.”
The reward of friendship is friendship itself.”
Neither can embellishments of language be found without arrangement and expression of thoughts, nor can thoughts be made to shine without the light of language. ”
Liberty is rendered even more precious by the recollection of servitude.”
Every man can tell how many goats or sheep he possesses, but not how many friends.”
Vivere est Cogitare”
So it may well be believed that when I found him taking a complete holiday, with a vast supply of books at command, he had the air of indulging in a literary debauch, if the term may be applied to so honorable an occupation.”
What can be more delightful than to have some one to whom you can say everything with the same absolute confidence as to yourself? Is not prosperity robbed of half its value if you have no one to share your joy?”
When I notice how carefully arranged his hair is and when I watch him adjusting the parting with one finger, I cannot imagine that this man could conceive of such a wicked thing as to destroy the Roman constitution.”
Thus nature has no love for solitude, and always leans, as it were, on some support; and the sweetest support is found in the most intimate friendship.”
The wise are instructed by reason, average minds by experience, the stupid by necessity and the brute by instinct.”
No power on earth, if it labours beneath the burden of fear, can possibly be strong enough to survive.”
For while we are enclosed in these confinements of the body, we perform as a kind of duty the heavy task of necessity; for the soul from heaven has been cast down from its dwelling on high and sunk, as it were, into the earth, a place just the opposite to godlike nature and eternity. But I believe that the immortal gods have sown souls in human bodies so there might exist beings to guard the world and after contemplating the order of heaven, might imitate it by their moderation and steadfastness in life.”
Apollo, sacred guard of earth's true core, Whence first came frenzied, wild prophetic word...”
For he (Cato) gives his opinion as if he were in Plato's Republic, not in Romulus' cesspool.”
Historia magistra vitae est”
Two distinctive traits especially identify beyond a doubt a strong and dominant character. One trait is contempt for external circumstances, when one is convinced that men ought to respect, to desire, and to pursue only what is moral and right, that men should be subject to nothing, not to another man, not to some disturbing passion, not to Fortune.
I would rather be wrong, by God, with Plato than be correct with those men.”
Calamus fortior gladio.”
“A nation can survive its fools, and even the ambitious. But it cannot survive treason from within. An enemy at the gates is less formidable, for he is known and carries his banner openly. But the traitor moves amongst those within the gate freely, his sly whispers rustling through all the alleys, heard in the very halls of government itself.”
O philosophy, life's guide! O searcher-out of virtue and expeller of vices! What could we and every age of men have been without thee? Thou hast produced cities; thou hast called men scattered about into the social enjoyment of life.”
Since it's clear then that what sets itself in motion is eternal, who could fail to attribute such a nature to the soul. Anything set in motion by external impetus is inanimate; what is animate moves by its own interior impulse. This is the nature and power of soul. And because it is the one thing out of all that sets itself in motion, then surely it was never born and will last forever.”
The countenance is the portrait of the soul, and the eyes mark its intention.”
What can be more delightful than to have some one to whom you can say everything with the same absolute confidence as to yourself?”
Just as apples when unripe are torn from trees, but when ripe and mellow drop down, so it is violence that takes life from young men, ripeness from old. This ripeness is so delightful to me that, as I approach nearer to death, I seem, as it were, to be sighting land, and to be coming to port at last after a long voyage.”
Let arms give place to the robe, and the laurel of the warriors yield to the tongue of the orator.”
Freedom will bite back more fiercely when suspended than when she remains undisturbed.”
Those wars are unjust which are undertaken without provocation. For only a war waged for revenge or defense can be just.”
O, tempora! O, mores!”
To be ignorant of what occurred before you were born is to remain always a child.”
Esse quam videri - "To be, rather than to seem (to be)”
Those who lack within themselves the means for living a blessed and happy life will find any age painful.
The good life is impossible without a good state; and there is no greater blessing than a well-ordered state.”
Wisdom is the only thing which can banish sorrow from the breast .”
The essence of Ciceronian philosophy is a sense of wonder at the interconnectedness of human beings to one another and to the universe that encompasses them.”
The fruit of too much liberty is slavery.”
What is sweeter than lettered ease?”
I conclude, then, that the plea of having acted in the interests of a friend is not a valid excuse for a wrong action. . . . We may then lay down this rule of friendship--neither ask nor consent to do what is wrong. For the plea "for friendship's sake" is a discreditable one, and not to be admitted for a moment.”
Times are bad. Children no longer obey their parents, and everyone is writing a book.”
Quo usque tandem abutere, Catalina, patientia nostra?”
My dear Scipio and Laelius. Men, of course, who have no resources in themselves for securing a good and happy life find every age burdensome. But those who look for all happiness from within can never think anything bad which Nature makes inevitable.”
I cannot find a faithful message-bearer," he wrote to his friend, the scholar Atticus. "How few are they who are able to carry a rather weighty letter without lightening it by reading.”
When you are aspiring to the highest place, it is honorable to reach the second or even the third rank.”
In communities and individuals alike, excessive freedom topples over into excessive slavery. Extreme freedom produces a tyrant, along with the extremely harsh and evil slavery that goes with him.”
A certain Spartan, whose name hasn’t even been passed down, despised death so greatly that when he was being led to execution after his condemnation by the ephors, he maintained a relaxed and joyous expression. To an enemy’s challenge – ‘Is this how you mock the laws of Lycurgus?’ – he answered, ‘On the contrary, I give great thanks to him, for he decreed a punishment that I can pay without taking out a loan or juggling debts.’101 O worthy man of Sparta! His spirit was so great that it seems he must have been an innocent man condemned to die. There have been many such in our own country.”
Wohl niemand tanzt, wenn er nüchtern ist, er müsste denn den Verstand verloren haben.”
In all matters, before beginning, a diligent preparation should be made.”
Speaking Latin properly is indeed to be held in the highest regard – not just because of its own merits, but in fact because it has been neglected by the masses. For it is not so much Noble to know Latin as it is disgraceful not to know it.”
“It’s not by strength or speed or swiftness of body that great deeds are done, but by wisdom, character, and sober judgment.”
He must protect the lives and interests of the people, appeal to his fellow citizens' patriotic interests, and, in general, set the welfare of the community above his own”
What is dishonorably got, is dishonorably squandered.”
There are no snares more dangerous than those which lurk under the guise of duty or the name of relationship.”
Amicitiae nostrae memoriam spero sempiternam fore”
Instead let Virtue herself, by her own unaided allurements, summon you to a glory that is genuine and real.”
We are all servants of the laws in order to be free”
More is lost by indecision than wrong decision.”
If you have a library in your garden, everything will be complete.”
But I must at the very beginning lay down this principle—friendship can only exist between good men.”
Love is the attempt to form a friendship inspired by beauty.”
Mea mihi conscientia pluris est quam omnium sermo”
Il sostegno su cui poggia quella fermezza e costanza che cerchiamo nell'amicizia è la fiducia. Niente è stabile di ciò che è infido. Inoltre conviene scegliere un amico sincero, gentile e affine, cioé che sia mosso dai nostri stessi sentimenti. Tutte cose che hanno attinenza con la fiducia. Non può essere fidata, infatti, un'indole ambigua e tortuosa né, di certo, può essere fidato o costante chi non è mosso dai medesimo sentimenti e non è affine per natura. [...] Prima di tutto che non vi sia niente di finto o simulato: è di un animo nobile, infatti, persino odiare apertamente piuttosto che celare il proprio pensiero dietro un falso aspetto.”
Be, rather than seem”
There is a story that Simonides was dining at the house of a wealthy nobleman named Scopas at Crannon in Thessaly, and chanted a lyric poem which he had composed in honor of his host, in which he followed the custom of the poets by including for decorative purposes a long passage referring to Castor and Pollux; whereupon Scopas with excessive meanness told him he would pay him half the fee agreed on for the poem, and if he liked he might apply for the balance to his sons of Tyndaraus, as they had gone halves in the panegyric.
What is sweeter than to have someone with whom you may dare discuss anything as if you were communing with yourself? How could your enjoyment in times of prosperity be so great if you did not have someone whose joy in them would be equal to your own?”
We must stand up against old age and make up for its drawbacks by taking pains. We must fight it as we should an illness. We must look after our health, use moderate exercise, take just enough food and drink to recruit, but not to overload, our strength. Nor is it the body alone that must be supported, but the intellect and soul much more.”
There is nothing so absurd that some philosopher has not already said it.”
I have the better right to indulgence herein, because my devotion to letters strengthens my oratorical powers, and these, such as they are, have never failed my friends in their hour of peril. Yet insignificant though these powers may seem to be, I fully realize from what source I draw all that is highest in them. Had I not persuaded myself from my youth up, thanks to the moral lessons derived from a wide reading, that nothing is to be greatly sought after in this life save glory and honour, and that in their quest all bodily pains and all dangers of death or exile should be lightly accounted, I should never have borne for the safety of you all the burnt of many a bitter encounter, or bared my breast to the daily onsets of abandoned persons. All literature, all philosophy, all history, abounds with incentives to noble action, incentives which would be buried in black darkness were the light of the written word not flashed upon them.”
Una sola offesa si deve completamente eliminare per conservare nell'amicizia l'utilità e la fiducia: infatti gli amici spesso si devono ammonire e rimproverare e questo deve essere accettato amichevolmente quando viene fatto con affetto. Ma, non so come, è vero quello che dice il mio amico nell'"Andria": "L'adulazione genera amici, la verità odio". Dannosa è la verità, se da lei nasce l'odio che è il veleno dell'amicizia, ma l'adulazione è molto più dannosa perché, essendo indulgente con gli errori, lascia che l'amico precipiti in rovina; grandissima è la colpa di chi disprezza la verità ed è spinto all'inganno dall'adulazione. [...] Non c'è più da sperare salvezza per chi abbia le orecchie tanto chiuse alla verità da non poter sentire il vero da un amico. [...] Ed è assurdo proprio questo, che quelli che vengono rimproverati non provano quel dispiacere che dovrebbero provare, ma provano proprio quello che non dovrebbero; infatti non si dolgono di aver sbagliato, sopportano di malanimo di essere rimproverati mentre sarebbe stato necessario il contrario, cioé addolorarsi delle colpe e godere della correzione.”
Old age: the crown of life, our play's last act.”
n the face of a true friend a man sees as it were a second self......”
Justice looks for no prize and no price; it is sought for itself, and is at once the cause and meaning of all the virtues. . . . The worst kind of injustice is to look for profit from injustice.”
What then is freedom? The power to live as one wishes.”
The causes of events are ever more interesting than the events themselves.”
An unjust peace is better than a just war.”
Legum servi sumus ut liberi esse possimus”
For what I lack in experience I make up for in diligence.”
Cannot people realize how large an income is thrift.”
“Of this last kind of comparisons is that quoted from the elder Cato, who, when asked what was the most profitable thing to be done on an estate, replied, “To feed cattle well.” “What second best?” “To feed cattle moderately well.” “What third best?” “To feed cattle, though but poorly.” “What fourth best?” “To plough the land.” And when he who had made these inquiries asked, “What is to be said of making profit by usury?” Cato replied, “What is to be said of making profit by murder?”
We ought, then, to set up images of a kind that can adhere longest in the memory. And we shall do so if we establish likenesses as striking as possible; if we set up images that are not many or vague, but doing something; if we assign to them exceptional beauty or singular ugliness; if we dress some of them with crowns or purple cloaks, for example, so that the likeness may be more distinct to us; or if we somehow disfigure them, as by introducing one stained with blood or soiled with mud or smeared with red paint, so that its form is more striking, or by assigning certain comic effects to our images, for that, too, will ensure our remembering them more readily.”
There is also a tradition about Socrates. He liked walking, it is recorded, until a late hour of the evening, and when someone asked him why he did this he said he was trying to work up an appetite for his dinner.”
For as I like a man in whom there is something of the old, so I like a man in whom there is something of the young; and he who follows this maxim, in body will possibly be an old man but he will never be an old man in mind.”
This shows how a man who practices exercise and self-control can preserve some of his original vigor even when he grows old.”
Is not prosperity robbed of half its value if you have no one to share your joy?”
atque illi artifices corporis simulacra ignotis nota faciebant; quae uel si nulla, nihilo sint tamen obscuriores clari uiri.”
nothing cruel is in fact beneficial; for cruelty is extremely hostile to the nature of man, which we ought to follow.”
Cannot people realize how large an income is thrift.”
For what I lack in experience I make up for in diligence.”
As I give thought to the matter, I find four causes for the apparent misery of old age; first it withdraws us from active accomplishments; second, it renders the body less powerful; third, it deprives us of almost all forms of enjoyment; fourth, it stands not far from death.”
It is useless to know what shall come to pass; it is a miserable thing to be tormented to no purpose.”
The brief arc of our days,
Il y a encore de certains devoirs à remplir envers même de qui nous avons reçu une injure; car la vengeance et la punition ont aussi leurs bornes. Je ne sais même si repentir de celui qui a fait l'injure ne suffirait pas et pour l'empêcher d'en faire une semblable à l'avenir et pour retenir les autres dans le devoir.”
Honesty is the best policy”
There is no doubt that a person who is called generous and open-handed has duty in mind, not gain. So likewise justice looks for no prize and no price; it is sought for itself, and is at once the cause and meaning of all the virtues.”
The purpose of education is to free the student from the tyranny of the present.”
We don't practise generosity in order to secure gratitude, nor do we invest our gifts in the hope of a favourable return. Rather, it is nature that inclines us towards generosity. Just so, we don't seek friendship with an expectation of gain, but regard the feeling of love as its own reward.”
Mine is the disaster, if disaster there be; and to be severely distressed at one's own misfortunes does not show that you love your friend, but that you love yourself.”
Art is born of the observation and investigation of nature.”
Whether it is a natural instinct or a mere illusion, I can’t say; but one’s emotions are more strongly aroused by seeing the places that tradition records to have been the favourite resort of men of note in former days, than by hearing about their deeds or reading their writings. My own feelings at the present moment are a case in point. I am reminded of Plato, the first philosopher, so we are told, that made a practice of holding discussions in this place;”
Though, even if there were no such great advantage to be reaped from it, and if it were only pleasure that is sought from these studies, still I imagine you would consider it a most reasonable and liberal employment of the mind: for other occupations are not suited to every time, nor to every age or place; but these studies are the food of youth, the delight of old age; the ornament of prosperity, the refuge and comfort of adversity; a delight at home, and no hindrance abroad; they are companions by night, and in travel, and in the country.”
The goddess Fortune is mad, blind, and stupid, some philosophers maintain. They declare that she stands upon a revolving globe of stone; whither Chance impels this stone, thither, they say, does Fortune fall. She is blind, they repeat, for that she fails wholly to perceive whereto she attaches herself. Moreover they declare that she is mad because she is cruel, uncertain, and inconstant; stupid because she knows not how to tell worthy from unworthy.”
I have taken so kindly to idleness that I can't tear myself away from it. So either I amuse myself with books, of which I have a good stock at Antium, or I count the waves - the weather is unsuitable for mackerel fishing... And my sole form of political activity is to hate the rascals, and even that I do without anger.”
The aim of a ship's captain is a successful voyage; a doctor's, health; a general's, victory. So the aim of our ideal statesman is the citizens' happy life--that is, a life secure in wealth, rich in resources, abundant in renown, and honorable in its moral character. That is the task which I wish him to accomplish--the greatest and best that any man can have.”
Men think they may justly do that for which they have a precedent.”
As for you, my young friends, I urge you to strive for virtue, for without it friendship cannot exist. And friendship, aside from virtue, is the greatest thing we can find in life.”
The course of life cannot change. Nature has but a single path and you travel it only once. Each stage of life has its own appropriate qualities—weakness in childhood, boldness in youth, seriousness in middle age, and maturity in old age. These are fruits that must be harvested in due season.”
Once you have surrounded the entire place with the nets of your thought, at least if practical experience has sharpened your skill, nothing will escape you, and everything that is in the subject matter will run up to you and fall into your hands.”
We should not be too confident in our belief of anything. (Cicero, Tusculan Disputations I.32)”
“We should not be too confident in our belief of anything. (Cicero, Tusculan Disputations I.32)”
L'amicizia supera in questo la parentela: nella parentela l'affetto si può eliminare, nell'amicizia no; infatti, tolto l'affetto viene meno l'amicizia stessa, la parentela rimane.”
Salus populi suprema est lex [the good of the people is the chief law].”
No one can be a sound judge if he does not give due weight to convincing suspicions.”
The greatest pleasures are only narrowly separated from disgust.”
Quo usque tandem abutere, Catilina, patientia nostra? Quam diu etiam furor iste tuus nos eludet? Quem ad finem sese effrenata iactabit audacia?
These people who govern us should not be so carried away by their own political power that they turn away from peace, but neither should they embrace a peace that is dishonorable.”
L'amico certo si vede nella sorte incerta.”
Nam eloquentiam quae admirationem non habet nullam iudico”
Did not he, then, who, if he had died at that time, would have died in all his glory, owe all the great and terrible misfortunes into which he subsequently fell to the prolongation of his life at that time?”
For riches, fame, and power, without wisdom and a just method of regulating ourselves and commanding others, a government is full of discredit and insolent arrogance, nor is there any kind of government more deformed than that in which the wealthiest are regarded as the noblest.”
As for the person who is not impelled to give thanks for the procession of the stars, the alternation of day and night, the regular succession of the seasons, and the fruits which are produced for our enjoyment--how can such a person be counted as human at all?”
Ein Raum ohne Bücher ist wie ein Körper ohne Seele.”
Read at every wait; read at all hours; read within leisure; read in times of labor; read as one goes in; read as one goest out. The task of the educated mind is simply put: read to lead.”
Nothing is too absurd for some philosopher to have said it.”
Thou shouldst eat to live; not live to eat.”
But what is more foolish, when men are in the plenitude of resources, opportunities, and wealth, than to procure the other things which money provides — horses, slaves, splendid raiment, and costly plate — and not procure friends, who are, if I may say so, life's best and fairest furniture?”
But if I am wrong in thinking the human soul immortal, I am glad to be wrong; nor will I allow the mistake which gives me so much pleasure to be wrested from me as long as I live.”
what shall I do with Diodotus the Stoic, whose pupil I have been from a boy, who has been my associate for so many years, who lives in my house, whom I both admire and love, and who despises the doctrines of Antiochus that you are putting forward? ‘Our doctrines,’ you will say, ‘are the only true ones.’ If they are true, certainly they are the only true ones, for there cannot be several true systems disagreeing with one another. Then is it we that are shameless, who do not wish to make a slip, or they presumptuous, who have persuaded themselves that they alone know everything?”
Utinam tam facile vera invenire possim quam falsa convincere.”
El pasado es también el presente y el futuro. La nación que olvida está pérdida.”
Angosciarsi profondamente per le proprie disgrazie non è proprio di chi ama l'amico ma se stesso.”
When conscience reigns, it allows no resting-place to lust, violence, and temerity.”
It is the function of justice not to do wrong to one's fellow-men; of considerateness , not to wound their feelings; and in this the essence of propriety is best seen.”
We mean then by the "good" those whose actions and lives leave no question as to their honour, purity, equity, and liberality; who are free from greed, lust, and violence; and who have the courage of their convictions.”
What can be more certain than this, that no one should be so stupid and so arrogant as to believe that reason and intelligence are present in him but not in the heavens and in the world? Or that those things which are barely understood by the highest intellectual reasoning are kept in motion without any intelligence at all? As for the person who is not impelled to give thanks for the procession of the stars, the alternation of day and night, the regular succession of the seasons, and the fruits which are produced for our enjoyment—how can such a person be counted as human at all?”
La pobreza no curte el alma ni la favorece. La esclaviza.”
Nothing that is devoid of justice can be honorable. It was well said by Plato: “Not only is knowledge, when divorced from justice, to be termed subtlety rather than wisdom; but also the soul prompt to encounter danger, if moved thereto by self-interest, and not by the common good, should have the reputation of audacity rather than of courage.”
If no use is made of the labours of past ages, the world must remain always in the infancy of knowledge.”
It is strong proof of men knowing things before birth, that when mere children they grasp innumerable facts with such speed as to show that they are not then taking them in for the first time, but are remembering and recalling them.”
“La pobreza no curte el alma ni la favorece. La esclaviza.”
The greatest pleasures are only narrowly separated from disgust.”
Did not he, then, who, if he had died at that time, would have died in all his glory, owe all the great and terrible misfortunes into which he subsequently fell to the prolongation of his life at that time?”
But if I am wrong in thinking the human soul immortal, I am glad to be wrong; nor will I allow the mistake which gives me so much pleasure to be wrested from me as long as I live.”
When conscience reigns, it allows no resting-place to lust, violence, and temerity.”
For old age is respected only if it defends itself, maintains its rights, submits to no one, and rules over its domain until its last breath.”
Nothing that is devoid of justice can be honorable. It was well said by Plato: “Not only is knowledge, when divorced from justice, to be termed subtlety rather than wisdom; but also the soul prompt to encounter danger, if moved thereto by self-interest, and not by the common good, should have the reputation of audacity rather than of courage.”
Todos los hombres pueden caer en un error; pero sólo los necios perseveran en él”
Thou shouldst eat to live; not live to eat.”
Read at every wait; read at all hours; read within leisure; read in times of labor; read as one goes in; read as one goest out. The task of the educated mind is simply put: read to lead.”
Nam eloquentiam quae admirationem non habet nullam iudico”
L'amico certo si vede nella sorte incerta.”
It is the function of justice not to do wrong to one's fellow-men; of considerateness , not to wound their feelings; and in this the essence of propriety is best seen.”
Quo usque tandem abutere, Catilina, patientia nostra? Quam diu etiam furor iste tuus nos eludet? Quem ad finem sese effrenata iactabit audacia?
As for the person who is not impelled to give thanks for the procession of the stars, the alternation of day and night, the regular succession of the seasons, and the fruits which are produced for our enjoyment--how can such a person be counted as human at all?”
But what is more foolish, when men are in the plenitude of resources, opportunities, and wealth, than to procure the other things which money provides — horses, slaves, splendid raiment, and costly plate — and not procure friends, who are, if I may say so, life's best and fairest furniture?”
Utinam tam facile vera invenire possim quam falsa convincere.”
We mean then by the "good" those whose actions and lives leave no question as to their honour, purity, equity, and liberality; who are free from greed, lust, and violence; and who have the courage of their convictions.”
It is strong proof of men knowing things before birth, that when mere children they grasp innumerable facts with such speed as to show that they are not then taking them in for the first time, but are remembering and recalling them.”
It is not merriment and wantonness, nor laughter or jesting, the comrade of frivolity, that make men happy; those are happy, often in sadness, whose wills are strong and true.”
Ein Raum ohne Bücher ist wie ein Körper ohne Seele.”
Nothing is more damaging to a state, nothing so contrary to justice and law, nothing less appropriate to a civilized community, than to force through a measure by violence where a country has a settled and established constitution.”
But unfortunately, decent people are usually slow to act and ignore dangers until a crisis erupts. They are sluggish and willing to abide with peace without honor, but their own inaction causes them to lose both.”
Res publica res est populi
I worked with Diodotus the Stoic, who made his residence in my house, and after a life of long intimacy died there only a short time ago.”
Even the heavens are open to the mind of Man. Man alone of all the animals has traced the pathways of the rising and the setting of the stars. Man has measured out the days and months and years. Man alone has understood and can predict the eclipses of the sun and moon for all future time, when they will occur, and whether they will be partial or total. When the mind contemplates these phenomena, it learns also knowledge of the gods. So religion is born, and with it goodness and all the virtues which make up the good life, a life which reflects the divine life. We need to be inferior to the gods in nothing except our mortality, which need in no way hinder us from living well. In explaining these things, I think that I have shown clearly enough how much superior is human nature to that of all the other animals. From which we must infer that such a shape and arrangement of our limbs and such a power of intelligence cannot have been the work of chance alone.”
Често човек е най-злият враг на самия себе си”
There are even those who say that they are merely minding their own business, whether out of concern for their family's wealth, or from a general distaste for human interaction. And, indeed, they don't seem to do anyone harm. But in escaping one kind of injustice they run right into another, in that they abandon the social aspect of life, giving it no attention, effort or assistance.”
By this time I was thoroughly terrified, not so much fearing death as the treachery of my own kind.”
Finally, an orator must have a keen mind capable of remembering a vast array of relevant precedents and examples from history, along with a thorough knowledge of the law and civil statutes.”
“the rational treatment of any subject ought to take its start from definition, that readers may understand what the author is writing about.”
Per aspera ad astra”
Thus, being ignorant of its nature, the masses suppose that men of wealth, influence, and important family connections are the best...as a result of this error on the part of the commons, the wealth rather than the excellence of a few men has come to control the state”
Loquor enim de docto homine et erudito, cui vivere est cogitare”
The result of the British war is a source of anxiety. For it is ascertained that the approaches to the island are protected by astonishing masses of cliff. Moreover, it is now known that there isn't a pennyweight of silver in that island, nor any hope of booty except from slaves, among whom I don't[Pg 283]&nbsp;suppose you can expect any instructed in literature or music.”
Let the soldier yield to the civilian”
Дом, в който няма книга, прилича на тяло, лишено от душа.”
But since the resources of individuals are small, while the multitude of those who need them is unbounded,”
Мирът е толкова благотворен, че самата тая дума ласкае слуха.”
And yet, as to where the blame for this misunderstanding resides, I can more easily conceive than write: since I am afraid that, while defending my own relations, I should not spare yours.”
That person then, whoever it may be, whose mind is quiet through consistency and self control, who finds contentment in himself, who neither breaks down in adversity nor crumbles in fright, nor burns with any thirsty need nor dissolves into wild and futile excitement, that person is the wise one we are seeking, and that person is happy”
nello stesso modo pensiamo che si debba cercare l'amicizia, spinti non dal guadagno, ma perché ogni suo frutto è proprio nello stesso amore. [...] Se l'interesse, infatti, cementasse le amicizie, questo, cambiando, le distruggerebbe. Ma poiché la natura non può cambiare, per questo le vere amicizie sono eterne.”
Das also ist keine Freundschaft, dass, wenn der eine die Wahrheit nicht hören will, der andere zum Lügen bereit ist.”
There is nothing so absurd that it has not been said by some philosopher.”
Odiosa razza di uomini, quella che rinfaccia i favori, che dovrebbe ricordare chi li ha ricevuti, non chi li fece.”
Hatreds not voiced, but which are concealed, is to be feared more than those openly declared.”
For of what value is their vaunted 'freedom from care'? In appearance it is indeed an alluring thing, but in reality often to be shunned. For it is inconsistent not to undertake any honourable business or course of conduct, or to lay it aside when undertaken, in order to avoid anxiety. Nay, if we continually flee from trouble, we must also flee from Virtue, who necessarily meets with some trouble in rejecting and loathing things contrary to herself, as when kindness rejects ill-will, temperance lust, and bravery cowardice. And so you may see that it is the just who are most pained at injustice, the brave at cowardice, the self-restrained at profligacy. It is, therefore, characteristic of the well-ordered mind both to rejoice at good deeds and to be pained at the reverse.”
La conducta privada de un hombre no puede ser separada de su conducta pública; son dos caras de una misma moneda.”
Now, what is the quality to look out for as a warrant for the stability and permanence of friendship? It is loyalty. Nothing that lacks this can be stable. We should also in making our selection look out for simplicity, a social disposition, and a sympathetic nature, moved by what moves us. These all contribute to maintain loyalty. You can never trust a character which is intricate and tortuous. Nor, indeed, is it possible for one to be trustworthy and firm who is unsympathetic by nature and unmoved by what affects ourselves. We may add, that he must neither take pleasure in bringing accusations against us himself, nor believe them when they are brought. All these contribute to form that constancy which I have been endeavouring to describe. And the result is, what I started by saying, that friendship is only possible between good men.”
The extreme of right is the extreme of wrong.”
La cultura no garantiza el buen juicio, el escepticismo ni la sabiduría.”
The best Armour of Old Age is a well-spent life preceding it; a Life employed in the Pursuit of useful Knowledge, in honourable Actions and the Practice of Virtue; in which he who labours to improve himself from his Youth, will in Age reap the happinest Fruits of them; not only because these never leave a Man, not even in the extremest Old Age; but because a Conscience bearing Witness that our Life was well-spent, together with the Remembrance of past good Actions, yields an unspeakable Comfort to the Soul”
Una nación puede sobrevivir a sus locos y hasta a sus ambiciosos, pero no puede sobrevivir a la traición intestina”
In anger, nothing right nor judicious can be done.”
But as the cause of perturbations is now discovered, 162for all of them arise from the judgment or opinion, or volition, I shall put an end to this discourse. But we ought to be assured, since the boundaries of good and evil are now discovered, as far as they are discoverable by man, that nothing can be desired of philosophy greater or more useful than the discussions which we have held these four days. For besides instilling a contempt of death, and relieving pain so as to enable men to bear it, we have added the appeasing of grief, than which there is no greater evil to man. For though every perturbation of mind is grievous, and differs but little from madness, yet we are used to say of others when they are under any perturbation, as of fear, joy, or desire, that they are agitated and disturbed; but of those who give themselves up to grief, that they are miserable, afflicted, wretched, unhappy. So that it doth not seem to be by accident, but with reason proposed by you, that I should discuss grief, and the other perturbations separately; for there lies the spring and head of all our miseries; but the cure of grief, and of other disorders, is one and the same in that they are all voluntary, and founded on opinion; we take them on ourselves because it seems right so to do. Philosophy undertakes to eradicate this error, as the root of all our evils: let us therefore surrender ourselves to be instructed by it, and suffer ourselves to be cured; for while these evils have possession of us, we not only cannot be happy, but cannot be right in our minds. We must either deny that reason can effect anything, while, on the other hand, nothing can be done right without reason, or else, since philosophy depends on the deductions of reason, we must seek from her, if we would be good or happy, every help and assistance for living well and happily.”
But of all the bonds of fellowship, there is none more noble, none more powerful than when good men of congenial character are joined in intimate friendship.”
For is there anything so absurd as to delight in many inanimate things, like public office, fame, and stately buildings, or dress and personal adornment, and to take little or no delight in a sentient being endowed with virtue and capable of loving, and — if I may so term it — of loving back?”
But when there is mutual fear between one individual and another, and between one class and another, then, because no one can rely on his own strength, a kind of pact is made between the people and the powerful few. From that emerges the compromise recommended by Scipio, i.e. the mixed form of government. You see, the mother of justice is not nature, nor good intentions, but weakness. For when one is faced with a threefold choice: (a) to do injury”
Cuanto más depravado se vuelve un pueblo, más se indigna públicamente contra la inmoralidad.”
No power is strong enough to be lasting if it labours under the weight of fear.”
“En un mot, nos mains tâchent de faire dans la nature, pour ainsi dire, une autre nature.”
This is all that I had to say about friendship; but I exhort you both so to esteem virtue (without which friendship cannot exist), that, excepting virtue, you will think nothing more excellent than friendship.”
Se o que separa os homens da injustiça fosse somente o castigo e não a Natureza, os maus não sentiriam preocupação alguma, tão logo desaparecesse o temor dos suplícios.(...)Se os maus vacilam em invocar estes princípios, com que amor deverão cultivá-los os bons? Se o castigo, se o temor aos suplícios, e não a própria essência desonrosa dos actos, nos levam a considerar uma vida dedicada à injustiça e ao crime, então nada é injusto, e os maus seriam mais adequadamente chamados imprudentes. Se o que nos leva a ser honrados não é a própria honradez, mas sim a utilidade e o interesse, então não somos bons, somos espertos.”
En política sólo puedes estar seguro de una cosa, de que jamás puedes estar seguro de nada”
The things possessing most utility also have the greatest amount of dignity, and indeed frequently of beauty also. In temples and colonnades, the pillars are to support the structure, yet they are as dignified in appearance as they are useful. Yonder pediment of the Capitol and those of the other temples are the product not of beauty but of actual necessity; for it was in calculating how to make the rainwater fall off the two sides of the roof that the dignified design of the gables resulted as a by-product of the needs of the structure —with the consequence that even if one were erecting a citadel in heave, where no rain could fall, it would be thought certain to be entirely lacking in dignity without a pediment.”
As you wisely said, Scipio, a true republic can exist only when the citizens consent to be bound together under the law. The monstrosity you describe surely deserves the name of tyranny just as much as if it were a single person. Actually, it is even worse, for there is nothing more despicable than a government that falsely assumes the appearance and the name of .”
Si sancisca, dunque, come prima legge dell'amicizia, questa: chiediamo agli amici cose oneste, facciamo cose oneste a causa degli amici, non aspettiamo neppure di essere pregati; ci sia sempre prontezza e non ci sia, invece, esitazione; ma abbiamo il coraggio di dare liberamente il nostro consiglio. Abbia moltissimo peso, nell'amicizia, l'autorità degli amici che ci spingono al bene e questa usata per ammonire non solo apertamente, ma anche aspramente se sarà il caso, e si obbedisca ad essa.”
Ought one to remain in one’s country when under a tyrant? If one’s country is under a tyrant ought one to labour at all hazards for the abolition of the tyranny, even at the risk of the total destruction of the city? Or ought we to be on our guard against the man attempting the abolition, lest he should rise too high himself?
nothing is generous that is not at the same time just.”
Предпочитам сдържаната разумност, пред бъбривата глупост.”
Речта трябва да произтича и да се развива от познание върху предмета. Ако ораторът не го е обхванал и изучил, то всяко красноречие е напразно, детинско усилие.”
If you have a garden in your library, nothing will fail”
Cuando un pueblo está decidido a ser esclavo y se halla degradado, es una locura tratar de animar de nuevo en él el espíritu de orgullo y honor, de libertad y amor a las leyes, pues abraza con entusiasmo sus cadenas con tal que lo alimenten sin ningún esfuerzo por su parte.”
As I gazed rather intently at the earth my grandfather said: How long will your thoughts continue to dwell upon the earth?”
Justice is the mistress and queen of all the virtues.”
But if this man alone is removed from this piratical crew, we may appear, perhaps, for a short time relieved from fear and anxiety, but the danger will settle down and lie hid in the veins and bowels of the republic. As it often happens that men afflicted with a severe disease, when they are tortured with heat and fever, if they drink cold water, seem at first to be relieved, but afterwards stiffer more and more severely; so this disease which is in the republic, if relieved by the punishment of this man, will only get worse and worse, as the rest will be still alive.”
Cum dignitate otium”
the man to open his ears widest to flatterers is he who first flatters himself and is fondest of himself.”
For other forms of relaxation are not so universally suited to all ages, times, and places; but these studies [of literature] sustain youth and entertain old age, they enhance prosperity, and offer a refuge and solace in adversity, they delight us when we are at home without hindering us in the wider world, and are with us at night, when we travel and when we visit the countryside.”
A good country does not begin a war except to defend its honor or to protect itself. ... Wars are unjust if they are undertaken without cause. Only a war waged in retaliation or defense can be considered just. ... No war is honorable unless it is announced and declared or it is for the recovery of property.”
Although in one point the circumstances of foreign triumph are better than those of domestic victory; because foreign enemies, either if they be crushed become one's servants, or if they be received into the state, think themselves bound to us by obligations; but those of the number of citizens who become depraved by madness and once begin to be enemies to their country,—those men, when you have defeated their attempts to injure the republic, you can neither restrain by force nor conciliate by kindness.”
Porque los que luchan contra el mal son los soldados de D•os.”
Quamquam scripsit artem rhetorieam Cleanthes, Chrysippus etiam, sed sic, ut si quis obmutescere concupierit, nihil aliud legere debeat.”
IT is alledged, that Memory fails in Old Age. That it does so, I freely grant; but then it is principally, where it has not been properly exercised; or with those who naturally have no Strength of Brain: For such as have, will pretty well retain it.”
its underlying principles are in such close harmony with the absolute and eternal right that they can never become obsolete. At the same time, the division and arrangement of the treatise give it, so far as I know, the precedence over all other ethical treatises ancient or modern.”
he grew old learning many a fresh lesson every day.”
In tragedy anything comic is a blemish and in comedy anything tragic is ugly”
non deterret sapientem mors.”
It is to this effect: If a man should ascend alone into heaven and behold clearly the structure of the universe and the beauty of the stars, there would be no pleasure for him in the awe-inspiring sight, which would have filled him with delight if he had had someone to whom he could describe what he had seen. Thus nature, loving nothing solitary, always strives for some sort of support, and man's best support is a very dear friend.”
“But inasmuch as things human are frail and fleeting, we must be ever on the search for some persons whom we shall love and who will love us in return; for if goodwill and affection are taken away, every joy is taken from life. For me, indeed, though he was suddenly snatched away, Scipio still lives and will always live; for it was his virtue that caused my love and that is not dead.”
The more laws a society has, the less justice”
Il bene pubblico è la legge suprema”
We are born for justice, and . . . what is just is based, not on opinion, but on nature.”
But worst of all is the third limitation, which is that 'whatever value a man places upon himself, the same value should be placed upon him by his friends.' For often in some men either the spirit is too dejected, or the hope of bettering their fortune is too faint. Therefore, it is not the province of a friend, in such a case, to have the same estimate of another that the other has of himself, but rather it is his duty to strive with all his might to arouse his friend's prostrate soul and lead it to a livelier hope and into a better train of thought.”
Aquele que se ama a si próprio não tem rivais”
For when the soul is deprived of emotion, what difference is there — I do not say between man and the beasts of the field, but between man and a stock or a stone, or any such thing?”
And so—it can't be repeated often enough—you should love after you have judged, not judge after you have loved.”
Años poderosos les gustan los sicofantes, los iguales les estaban agradecidos por su amabilidad y los inferiores no deseaban otra cosa que servir a personas mas nobles y excepcionales.”
I do not understand what the man who is happy wants in order to be happier.”
Ey yüksek bilgelik! Dostluğu yaşamdan kaldırmak isteyenler, güneşi dünyadan ayıranlara benzerler; ölmez tanrılar insanlara dostluktan daha iyi, daha tatlı bir şey vermedi...
User de ce qu’on a, et agir en tout selon ses forces, telle est la règle du sage.”
Non nobis solum. OR
Magistratum legem esse loquentem, legem autem mutum magistratum”
Si la clase media sirve para algo es para trabajar y pagar impuestos, con los que podamos sobornar a la plebe de Roma y tenerla contenta y mantenerla dócil. Es cierto que los plebeyos de Roma son como animales, pero son muchos y necesitamos sus votos para alcanzar el poder. Que la clase media nos sirva hasta el final, porque los nuevos ciudadanos no piensan mas que en trabajo.”
Un hogar sin libros es como un cuerpo sin alma.”
Likewise other things, which seem to some to be worthy of admiration, are by many thought to be of no value at all. But concerning friendship, all, to a man, think the same thing: those who have devoted themselves to public life; those who find their joy in science and philosophy; those who manage their own business free from public cares; and, finally, those who are wholly given up to sensual pleasures — all believe that without friendship life is no life at all, or at least they so believe if they have any desire whatever to live the life of free men.”
Cuando lo hombres renuncian voluntariamente a su libertad po su seguridad, pronto pierden incluso esa degradada seguridad”
For what, in the name of heaven, is more to be desired than wisdom? What is more to be prized? What is better for a man, what more worthy of his nature? Those who seek after it are called philosophers; and philosophy is nothing else, if one will translate the word into our idiom, than ‘the love of wisdom.’ Wisdom … is ‘the knowledge of things human and divine and of the causes by which those things are controlled.’ And if the man lives who would belittle the study of philosophy, I quite fail to see what in the world he would see fit to praise.”
Vita enim mortuorum in memoria est posita vivorum.”
Językiem bogów jest język grecki.”
for my own part I cannot cordially approve, I merely tolerate, a philosopher who talks of setting bounds to the desires. Is it possible for desire to be kept within bounds? It ought to be destroyed, uprooted altogether.”
that are divided by seven distinct intervals, which is generally the regulating number of all things.”
Solo un loco bailaría estando sobrio.”
Wenn du einen Garten und eine Bibliothek hast, wird Dir an nichts fehlen.”
Breve tempus ætatis satis est longum ad bene honesteque vivendum”
If people think that friendship springs from weakness and from a purpose to secure someone through whom we may obtain that which we lack, they assign her, if I may so express it, a lowly pedigree indeed, and an origin far from noble, and they would make her the daughter of poverty and want.”
For friendship is nothing else than an accord in all things, human and divine, conjoined with mutual goodwill and affection, and I am inclined to think that, with the exception of wisdom, no better thing has been given to man by the immortal gods.”
The beginnings of all things are small.”
Uma casa sem livros é como um corpo sem alma”
“Sapientia autem est, ut a veteribus philosophis definitum est, rerum divinarum et humanarum causarumque, quibus eae res continentur, scientia, cuius studium qui vituperat haud sane intellego quidnam sit quod laudandum putet.”
O vitae Philosophia dux! O virtutum indagatrix
In Cicero’s time the left and the right wing in ethical philosophy were represented by the Epicureans and the Stoics respectively, while the Peripatetics held a middle ground.”
O tempora! O mores!”
See," says he, "you who deny a providence, how many have been saved by their prayers to the Gods."
Une maison sans livres est comme un corps sans âme.”
Age nunc, refer animum, sis, ad veritatem, [...].”
Nobody can give you wiser advice than yourself.”
El cariño es muy traicionero. La justicia tiene sus exigencias, pero el cariño pugna por ella”
Έχω βιβλιοθήκη και κήπο”
Tum enim dixit duo corpora esse rei publicae, unum debile infirmo capite, alterum firmum sine capite.”
Turpis autem fuga mortis omni est morte pejor.”
Elephanto beluarum nulla prudentior: at figura quae vastior? De bestiis loquor: quid, inter ipsos homines nonne et simillimis formis dispares mores et moribus simillimis figura dissimilis? (1.97 De Natura Deorum)”
Historia vero testis
However one defines man, the same definition applies to us all.”
Respiraro, si te videro.”
Yo no he abandonado Roma, es Roma la que me ha abandonado a mí”
Epicurus however is a more troublesome opponent, because he is a combination of two different sorts of pleasure, and because besides himself and his friends there have been so many later champions of his theory, which somehow or other enlists the support of that least competent but most powerful adherent, the general public.”
What he sees often, he does not wonder at, even if he does not know why it is. If something happens which he has not seen before, he thinks it a prodigy.”
So let this be the first and sacred law of friendship: seek only good from friends, do only good for the sake of friends- and don't wait to be asked! Be always attentive! Banish hesitation! Be ready to give advice freely! Take seriously the good advice of friends. Be ready to offer it openly, even forcefully, if the occasion demands- and also be ready to follow when it's been offered.”
Away with these old wives' tales, with this idea that it's terrible to die before one's time! What time? The time of nature? It made us a loan without a due date. Why complain if it seeks repayment at a time of its choosing? After all, you accepted the loan on these terms!”
Dacă ai o grădină și o bibliotecă, ai tot ce-ți trebuie.”
Nimium boni est, cui nihil est mali.”
In omni disciplina informa est artis praeceptio sine summa assiduitate exercitationis.”
A wise man’s life is all one preparation for death.”
Denn wirklich tugendhaft wollen nicht so Viele&nbsp;sein&nbsp;als&nbsp;scheinen.”
Suum Cuique”
Omnium Rerum Principia Parva Sunt – 'The beginnings of all things are small”
Gut ist, was den Guten gefällt.”
O noble philosophy! Why, they seem to take the sun out of the universe when they deprive life of friendship, than which we have from the immortal gods no better, no more delightful boon.”
“Non nobis solum nati sumus.”
The egoist loves himself without rivals.”
Quid? Quod eadem mente res dissimillimas comprehendimus, ut colorem saporem, calorem, odorem, sonum? Quae numquam quinque nuntiis animus cognosceret, nisi ad eum omnia referrentur et is omnium iudex solus esset.”
Wherefore, if this consideration moves any one, that it has been heard that some tool of Lentulus is running about the shops,—is hoping that the minds of some poor and ignorant men may be corrupted by bribery; that, indeed, has been attempted and begun, but no one has been found either so wretched in their fortune or so abandoned in their inclination as not to wish the place of their seat and work and daily gain, their chamber and their bed, and, in short, the tranquil course of their lives, to be still preserved to them. And far the greater part of those who are in the shops,—yes, indeed, (for that is the more correct way of speaking,) the whole of this class is of all the most attached to tranquillity; their whole stock, indeed, their whole employment and livelihood, exists by the peaceful intercourse of the citizens, and is wholly supported by peace. And if their gains are diminished whenever their shops are shut, what will they be when they are burnt?”
More is lost by indecision than wrong decision. Indecision is the thief of opportunity. ​”
Angustus animus pecūniam amat".”
statuere enim qui sit sapiens vel maxime videtur esse sapientis”
Now in regard to trades and other means of livelihood, which ones are to be considered becoming to a gentleman and which ones are vulgar, we have been taught, in general, as follows. First, those means of livelihood are rejected as undesirable which incur people's ill-will, as those of tax-gatherers and usurers. Unbecoming to a gentleman, too, and vulgar are the means of livelihood of all hired workmen whom we pay for mere manual labour, not for artistic skill; for in their case the very wage they receive is a pledge of their slavery. Vulgar we must consider those also who buy from wholesale merchants to retail immediately; for they would get no profits without a great deal of downright lying; and verily, there is no action that is meaner than misrepresentation. And all mechanics are engaged in vulgar trades; for no workshop can have anything liberal about it. Least respectable of all are those trades which cater for sensual pleasures.”
Osons non seulement couper les branches de nos malheurs, mais arracher tous les filaments de leurs racines. Peut-être pourtant en restera-t-il quelque chose, tellement sont profondes les souches de la déraison ; mais il ne restera que le nécessaire. Ainsi tiens pour certains que, si l'âme ne guérit pas (ce qui est impossible sans la philosophie), il n'y aura pas de fins à nos misères. Aussi, puisque nous avons commencé, confions-nous à elle pour être soignés ; nous guérirons si nous le voulons.”
Fieri autem potest ut recte quis sentiat et id, quod sentit, polite eloqui non possit; sed mandare quemquam litteris cogitationes suas, qui eas nec disponere nec illustrare possit nec delectatione aliqua adlicere lectorem, hominis est intemperanter abutentis et otio et litteris.”
primam esse historiae legem, ne quid falsi dicere audeat, n quid veri non audeat" - "Historiju trebamo poznavati kako ne bi govorili neistinu
Il me semble que cette méditation anticipée des malheurs humains produit presque le même effet que la guérison obtenue avec le temps, sinon que, dans le premier cas, c'est le raisonnement qui guérit, et dans le second, la nature ; mais on comprend l'essentiel, à savoir que le mal tenu pour le plus grand de tous n'est jamais si grand qu'il puisse détruire la vie heureuse.”
277&nbsp;The Lætorian Law was a security for those under age against extortioners, etc. By this law all debts contracted under twenty-five years of age were void.”
Die Menschen kommen durch nichts den Göttern näher, als wenn sie Menschen glücklich machen.”
Es absolutamente precisa la guarda y conservación del propio carácter, el cultivo de las buenas cualidades que poseemos (...). De nada sirve obrar en desacuerdo con la naturaleza y perseguir objetivos que nos son inaccesibles. (...) Nada es más conveniente que obrar siempre en consonancia con el propio carácter, y esto no se puede alcanzar si, imitando el carácter de los demás, renunciamos al propio. (...) Que cada persona conozca bien su propia índole y juzgue con rigor lo que tiene de bueno y de malo. (...)”
Nihilne igitur illa vicinitas redolet, nihihne hominum fama, nihil Baiae denique ipsae loquuntur ? Illae vero non loquuntur solum,verum etiam personant, huc unius mulieris libidinem esse prolapsam, ut ea non modo solitudinem ac tenebras atque haec flagitiorum integumenta non quaerat, sed in turpissimis rebus frequentissima celebritate et clarissima luce laetetur.
Ut conclave sine libris ita corpus sine anima”
A hatred not shown and which remains concealed, is to be feared more than that which is openly voiced.”
all that I can do is to urge you to put friendship before all things human; for nothing is so conformable to nature and nothing so adaptable to our fortunes whether they be favourable or adverse.”
Wat kan in de bezigheden der mensen van belang lijken voor een man die de eeuwigheid voor ogen houdt en zich bewust is van de uitgestrektheid van het universum?”
The man who has a garden and a library has everything.”
room without books is like a body without a soul.”
sed inter hominem et beluam ho maxime interest, quod haec tantum, quantum sensu movetur, ad id solum, quod adest quodque prasens est, se accommodat paulum admodum sentiens praeteritum aut futurum; homo autem, quod rationis est particeps, per quam consequentia cernit, causas rerum videt earumque praegressus et quasi antecessiones non ignorat, similitudines comparat rebusque praesentibus adjungit atque annectit futuras, facile totius vitae cursum videt ad eamque degendam praeparat res necessarias.”
There might be believed to exist one Universal Monarch in heaven [who] be accounted both king and father of all creatures.”
Occupavi te, inquit, fortuna, atque cepi omnesque aditus tuos interclusi, ut ad me aspirare non posses.”
For who is there who, shooting all day, will not sometimes hit the mark?”
A room without books is like a body without a soul: —”
it is by no means surprising that though we are first commended to Wisdom by the primary natural instincts, afterwards Wisdom itself becomes dearer to us than are the instincts from which we came to her.”
NOXIAE POENA PAR ESTO (let the punishment fit the crime).”
“Read at every wait; read at all hours; read within leisure; read in times of labor; read as one goes in; read as one goes out. The task of the educated mind is simply put: Read to lead.”
qui denique, ut Africanum avum meum scribit Cato solitum esse dicere, possit idem de se praedicare, numquam se plus agere, quam nihil cum ageret, numquam minus solum esse, quam cum solus esset.”
Itaque inter omnis omnium gentium summa constat; omnibus enim innatum est et in animo quasi insculptum esse deos.”
The greatest states have been overthrown by the young and sustained and restored by the old. ... Rashness is the product of the budding-time of youth, prudence of the harvest-time of age.”
nature without learning has meant more than learning without nature.”
Zoals de dwaasheid nooit tevreden is, zelfs niet als haar wensen worden vervuld, zo is de wijsheid steeds tevreden met wat voorhanden is, en heeft nooit onvrede met zichzelf.”
Occupavi te, inquit, fortuna, atque cepi omnesque aditus tuos interclusi, ut ad me aspirare non posses.
for in history there is nothing more pleasing than clear and brilliant brevity.”
ait enim declinare atomum sine causa; quo nihil turpius physico, quam fieri quicquam sine causa dicere, — et”
We may, I think, give the name of perfect duty to the absolute right, which the Greeks term κατόρθωμα;1 while contingent duty is what they call καθη̂κον.2 According to their definitions, what is right in itself is perfect duty; that for the doing of which a satisfactory reason can be given is a contingent”
For what youth longs for, old age has attained. A young person hopes to have a long life, but an old man has already had one.”
É impossível não ser felicíssimo quem em tudo depende apenas de si e em si mesmo tudo apóia.”
Socrates used to pronounce a curse upon those who first drew a conceptual distinction between things naturally inseparable.”
Tăcerea face parte din conversație.”
We forget our pleasures, we remember our sufferings”
The evils which were undermining the Republic bear so many striking resemblances to those which threaten the civic and national life of America to-day that the interest of the period is by no means merely historical.”
Occupavi te, inquit, fortuna, atque cepi omnesque aditus tuos interclusi, ut ad me aspirare non posses.
And the senate, O citizens, acted with such lenity, that, out of so great a conspiracy, and such a number and multitude of domestic enemies, it thought that since the republic was saved, the minds of the rest might be restored to a healthy state by the punishment of nine most abandoned men.
Abs te tam diu nihil litterarum!”
We are not born for ourselves alone”
But if, omitting all these things in which we are rich and of which he is destitute,—the senate, the Roman knights, the people, the city, the treasury, the revenues, all Italy, all the provinces, foreign nations,—if I say, omitting all these things, we choose to compare the causes themselves which are opposed to one another, we may understand from that alone how thoroughly prostrate they are. For on the one side are fighting modesty, on the other wantonness; on the one chastity, on the other uncleanness; on the one honesty, on the other fraud; on the one piety, on the other wickedness; on the one consistency, on the other insanity; on the one honour, on the other baseness; on the one continence, on the other lust; in short, equity, temperance, fortitude, prudence, all the virtues contend against iniquity with luxury, against indolence, against rashness, against all the vices; lastly, abundance contends against destitution, good plans against baffled designs, wisdom against madness, well-founded hope against universal despair.
Nega me ei iratum fore, si ad mea comitia non venerit. Atque haec huius modi sunt.”
A room without books is like a body without a soul.”
For what is there, O Catiline, that can now afford you any pleasure in this city? for there is no one in it, except that band of profligate conspirators of yours, who does not fear you,—no one who does not hate you. What brand of domestic baseness is not stamped upon your life? What disgraceful circumstance is wanting to your infamy in your private affairs? From what licentiousness have your eyes, from what atrocity have your hands, from what iniquity has your whole body ever abstained? Is there one youth, when you have once entangled him in the temptations of your corruption, to whom you have not held out a sword for audacious crime, or a torch for licentious wickedness?
If I saw that I was even undeservedly so suspected and bated by my fellow-citizens, I would rather flee from their sight than be gazed at by the hostile eyes of every one. And do you, who, from the consciousness of your wickedness, know that the hatred of all men is just and has been long due to you, hesitate to avoid the sight and presence of those men whose minds and senses you offend? If your parents feared and hated you, and if you could by no means pacify them, you would, I think, depart somewhere out of their sight. Now, your country, which is the common parent of all of us, hates and fears you, and has no other opinion of you, than that you are meditating parricide in her case; and will you neither feel awe of her authority, nor deference for her judgment, nor fear of her power?
Puto te in hoc aut risisse aut ingemuisse.”
Not every mistake is a foolish one.”